<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_assets/epub.css" />
    <title>Video Games as Interactives in Museums</title>

  </head>
  <body xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" id="page-essays-huber">
            <section class="quire-page__header hero">
              <div class="hero-body">
                <h1 class="quire-page__header__title" id="video-games-as-interactives-in-museums">
                  Video Games as Interactives in Museums
                </h1>
                <div class="quire-page__header__contributor">
                  <ul class="quire-contributors-list name-title align-left">
                    <li class="quire-contributor" id="shuber">
                      <span class="quire-contributor__name">Samuel Huber</span>,
                      <span class="quire-contributor__affiliation">George Washington University</span>
                    </li>
                  </ul>
                </div>
              </div>
            </section>

            <section class="section quire-page__content">
              <div class="container">
                <div class="content">
                  <p>
                    Video games have gone from a small niche in the entertainment
                    sector to a cultural mainstay alongside film and literature in
                    just a few decades. For the purpose of this paper video games
                    include arcade games with their own standalone cabinets, games
                    played on both at home consoles and personal computers, and
                    mobile games played on the phone. In 2021, the video game
                    industry had an annual revenue of over 214 billion dollars, a
                    number that is predicted to continue to rise in coming years.
                    (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">World Economic Forum 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Gaming Is Booming and Is Expected to Keep Growing. This
                        Chart Tells You All You Need to Know. World Economic
                        Forum. Accessed October 4, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/07/gaming-pandemic-lockdowns-pwc-growth/" target="_blank">https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/07/gaming-pandemic-lockdowns-pwc-growth/</a>.</span></cite>) The cultural and economic impact of video games on today’s
                    world cannot be ignored or denied. Given this significance, it
                    makes sense that video games would be represented in museums.
                    They also can unlock new opportunities for engagement and
                    outreach that would have been out of reach without the
                    influence of video games. Different museums approach having
                    video games in their collection in a variety of ways,
                    <em>The Museum of Modern Art</em> (<em>MOMA</em>) incorporates
                    them into their galleries, while the
                    <em>Coputerspielemuseum</em> and the
                    <em>Strong Museum of Play</em> have recreated arcades or other
                    themed spaces for some of the games that they have on display.
                    The approaches vary based on the hardware and requirements of
                    the game themselves, as well as what the museums are trying to
                    convey by displaying them and how interactive they want them
                    to be.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    Video games have value in museums in multiple respects. One of
                    the things that make video games stand out from other artistic
                    mediums is their inherent interactivity. Video games are meant
                    to be played;, they take the player and make them a part of
                    the story. Because of this, in order toto be best represented
                    in a museum, video games should be playable to some degree.
                    Video games are meant to be played, they bring people in on
                    the experience and make their choices matter. While museums
                    have made strides in increasing interactives in exhibits and
                    museum programming, the fact that video games are made to be
                    interacted with encourages further engagement from visitors.
                    When interviewed about the museum’s Video Game Lab as Video
                    Game Curator for the
                    <em>Australian Center for the Moving Image</em>, Video Game
                    Curator Arieh Offman, said describes, “And it is this
                    interactivity that is the crux of what makes games so
                    appealing – you are not just watching or listening to stories
                    but become part of them. You control the characters, you make
                    the choices –they become your victories and your defeats, and
                    the sense of achievement that a player feel is unique to the
                    medium of videogames.” (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">ACMI 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Curating Our Centrepiece Exhibition. ACMI. Accessed
                        October 22, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.acmi.net.au/stories-and-ideas/curating-our-centrepiece-exhibition-story-moving-image/" target="_blank">https://www.acmi.net.au/stories-and-ideas/curating-our-centrepiece-exhibition-story-moving-image/</a>.</span></cite>) The interactivity inherent to games is what makes them
                    stand out from other forms of media. However, there are
                    complications in having playable video games as a part of a
                    museum collection, because of hardware and software
                    limitations. Every playable game requires its own console or
                    other device to be run on, in addition to controllers,
                    displays, and of course copies of the game’s code. Museums
                    would either need to limit the number of visitors who can
                    participate at once, acquire multiple copies of the necessary
                    hardware and software, or engage with emulators. The Museum of
                    Modern Art has a variety of video games in its collection,
                    ranging from staples of the industry like <em>Pac Man</em>, to
                    independently made games like <em>Getting Over It</em>. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Never Alone 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Never alone: Video games and other interactive design |
                        moma. Accessed November 25, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.moma.org/calendar/exhibitions/5453" target="_blank">https://www.moma.org/calendar/exhibitions/5453</a>.</span></cite>) <em>MOMA</em> has addressed software concerns in the
                    acquisition stage by ensuring that they also acquire the code
                    for any games that they acquire in their original language so
                    that they can be better preserved, even if the physical media
                    fails, or if the game, console, or controller is too fragile
                    to be interacted with regularly by visitors. They also use a
                    case-by-case basis for how interactive they have the games on
                    display be. Games that can be played in their entirety in a
                    short time are available to be played as is, while longer or
                    more complex games have smaller sections able to be played
                    <em>MOMA</em> also uses emulators in cases where the physical
                    media on which the game is stored is too fragile to be used.
                    (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Antonelli and Galloway 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Antonelli, Paola, and Galloway, Paul. “When Video Games
                        Came to the Museum | Magazine | Moma.” MOMA. Accessed
                        October 20, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.moma.org/magazine/articles/798" target="_blank">https://www.moma.org/magazine/articles/798</a>.
                      </span></cite>) Emulators are recreations of games, normally games that are
                    older or no longer readily available to be played, that can be
                    played on a newer device, normally a computer. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Wells 2020</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Wells, Robert Earl. What Is a Video Game Emulator? A Way
                        to Play Retro Games on Your PC. Lifewire, March 11, 2020.
                        <a href="https://www.lifewire.com/video-game-emulators-need-to-know-4687006" target="_blank">https://www.lifewire.com/video-game-emulators-need-to-know-4687006</a>.</span></cite>) However, most emulators available are fan made, and
                    unofficial, and thus would call legal issues if they were a
                    part of a museum collection without proper licensing.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    In addition to MOMA, there are other museums that have already
                    integrated video games as a part of their exhibitions, and in
                    some cases are in large part dedicated to collecting and
                    exhibiting video games and related media. One of the museums
                    most focused on video games is the
                    <em>Coputerspielemuseum</em> in Berlin, Germany. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Computerspielemuseum Home 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Computerspielemuseum Berlin: Homepage. Homepage |
                        manomoneta. Accessed October 20, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/43-Homepage.htm" target="_blank">https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/43-Homepage.htm</a>.</span></cite>) This museum is dedicated to electronic games, and many of
                    their exhibits allow visitors to interact with and play some
                    of the games in the museum’s collection. For example, one of
                    their current exhibitions is called “<em>Impact Games</em>”
                    the exhibit has several reconstructed spaces showing how video
                    games of different eras were played at the time. These include
                    a recreated arcade and living room to represent the 1970s,
                    when games first started to appear in homes, and bedrooms for
                    the 1980s and 1990s. The goal of this exhibit is for visitors
                    to see the development of video games over time, and how they
                    were perceived and played by people at the time. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Computerspielemuseum Exhibitions 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Computerspielemuseum Berlin: Special Exhibition. Special
                        Exhibition | manomoneta. Accessed October 22, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/Museum/46-Special-Exhibition.htm" target="_blank">https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/Museum/46-Special-Exhibition.htm</a>.</span></cite>) These exhibits are a love letter to the games and the time
                    that they came from, they work to recontextualize them for
                    younger people. Beyond that, the
                    <em>Coputerspielemuseum</em> also has art installation based
                    around video games, including a giant controller for a
                    Nintendo console that requires multiple visitors to work
                    together to play and a specially modified pong table which
                    punishes players when their opponent scores a point.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    The <em>Coputerspielemuseum’s</em> collection of video games,
                    and related media is extensive, with over 35,000 storage
                    devices containing video games software, 350 consoles and
                    computers for playing the games, and 12,000 magazines. Their
                    games are all stored in their original form, with no mention
                    of emulators or similarly copied or reproduced games. They
                    have also participated in projects to further research in the
                    preservation of digital media. The
                    <em>Coputerspielemuseum</em> not only has an impressive
                    collection of video games, gaming hardware, and related media,
                    but also shows dedication to having the games remain playable
                    and interactive for visitors.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    The <em>Strong Museum of Play</em> is another museum with a
                    focus on video games. They hold the
                    <em>International Center for the History of Online Games,</em>
                    the <em>World Video Game Hall of Fame,</em> a Video Game Play
                    Capture Project, and many permanent and temporary exhibits
                    that are dedicated to video games. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">ICHEG 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">International Center for the History of Electronic Games.
                        The Strong National Museum of Play, July 24, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.museumofplay.org/collections/icheg/" target="_blank">https://www.museumofplay.org/collections/icheg/</a>.</span></cite>) Some of these exhibits explore video games cultural impact,
                    and their development, some are games made purposely for the
                    museum to be interactive elements for exhibits, and others are
                    dedicated to a single game, its development, art style, and
                    the story behind it.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    One of these is a permanent exhibit dedicated to the game
                    series <em>Age of Empires</em>, a game series for the PC that
                    falls under the category of RTS, or real time strategy. The
                    game has players select an empire from various points in
                    history and compete against another set of empires controlled
                    by other players, or the computer. Players must build up an
                    economy to unlock new technologies, create a powerful
                    military, and defeat their opponents. There have been four
                    games in the main franchise, with one spinoff titled
                    <em>Age of Mythology</em>. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Age of Empires 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Age of Empires Franchise - Official Web Site.” Age of
                        Empires / World’s Edge Studio, October 25, 2021.
                        <a href="https://www.ageofempires.com/" target="_blank">https://www.ageofempires.com/</a>.
                      </span></cite>) The exhibit at the <em>Strong Museum of Play</em> has a
                    history of the games’ developer, an area with a throne where
                    visitors can take a picture like they are leaders of their own
                    empires, concept art of the games, a playable version of the
                    original <em>Age of Empires</em>, and interactives and
                    displays that go over how the developers incorporated history
                    into the games and how it influenced gameplay. This exhibit
                    explores every aspect of the game, not only allowing visitors
                    to play, but also presenting various stages of the game’s
                    development process, and the people who worked on it. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Age of Empires, The Strong National Museum of Play
                        2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Age of Empires. The Strong National Museum of Play,
                        October 31, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.museumofplay.org/exhibit/age-of-empires/" target="_blank">https://www.museumofplay.org/exhibit/age-of-empires/</a>.</span></cite>) The thought process of game developers is something most
                    people who play the games are not normally privy to. The
                    <em>Age of Empires</em> exhibit is designed in a way where
                    visitors can not only interact with the game itself but also
                    get a look at how it was made and what choices went into those
                    decisions. While most other exhibits dedicated to games seem
                    more focused on broader categories of games, the
                    <em>Age of Empires</em> exhibit is an excellent example of how
                    to highlight the development and story of one game franchise
                    in particular.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    The <em>Strong Museum of Play</em> also has an exhibit similar
                    to the Coputerspielemuseum’s <em>Impact Play</em> called
                    <em>EGame Revolution</em>, which focuses on having video games
                    from every generation to play though. This includes a large
                    arcade space with over 48 arcade cabinet style games, home
                    consoles with playable games ranging from Nintendo’s
                    <em>N64</em> to <em>Sony’s PlayStation 3</em>, as well as
                    unique games, such as an oversized version of <em>Tetris</em>.
                    (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Egamerevolution 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Egamerevolution. The Strong National Museum of Play, July
                        5, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.museumofplay.org/exhibit/egamerevolution/" target="_blank">https://www.museumofplay.org/exhibit/egamerevolution/</a>.
                      </span></cite>) Aside from providing context for these games, and allowing
                    to see the progression of games over time, as previously
                    mentioned when discussing the
                    <em>Coputerspielemuseum’s</em> collection,
                    <em>eGame Revolution</em>, and exhibits like it also allow for
                    visitors to access a catalog of games that they would
                    otherwise not get to see or play, especially in one place. The
                    exhibit also discusses how video games evolved, and how they
                    changed the way that people play.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    Along with their video game collections like
                    <em>eGame Revolution</em>, the <em>Strong Museum</em> also has
                    a large collection of video games in storage. As with any
                    museum, only a small portion of their collection can be on
                    display at a time, and the <em>Strong Museum</em> is not
                    solely dedicated to video games, so that collection can only
                    take up a certain amount of space on the museum floor. But
                    this collection still serves as a valuable academic resource,
                    through the museum’s website, researchers can request to visit
                    the museum in order to schedule a visit to the museum’s
                    <em>International Center for the History of Electronic
                      Games</em>
                    where they can play games in the collection on-site. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">The Strong National Museum of Play 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Research Access. The Strong National Museum of Play, July
                        10, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.museumofplay.org/collections/research-access/" target="_blank">https://www.museumofplay.org/collections/research-access/</a>.</span></cite>) Since digital access for game collections can be a murky
                    area, this allows for games that would be otherwise
                    unavailable to be accessed by a much wider range of people.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    Older video games are a storage and preservation concern for
                    museums collecting video games. Floppy disks, which contain
                    may older PC games, have an expected shelf life of 10-20
                    years, and CDs and DVDs, which were the main medium for PC and
                    console games following the floppy disk era, have a listed
                    life span of between 2-25 years depending on how they are
                    stored. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Arcserve 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Arcserve. “Data Storage Lifespans: How Long Will Media
                        Really Last?” Arcserve, April 18, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.arcserve.com/blog/data-storage-lifespans-how-long-will-media-really-last#:~:text=Floppy%20Disk&amp;text=Floppy%20disks%20were%20never%20very,last%20ten%20to%20twenty%20years" target="_blank">https://www.arcserve.com/blog/data-storage-lifespans-how-long-will-media-really-last#:~:text=Floppy
                          Disk&amp;text=Floppy disks were never very,last ten to
                          twenty years</a>.
                      </span></cite>) The limited shelf life of video games is not limited to
                    physical hardware, it also applies to digital colonies of
                    games and their marketplaces. Many consoles have their own
                    digital stores that have gone through multiple iterations,
                    removing older games as they go. Meanwhile PC games are sold
                    across multiple marketplaces, leaving more room for
                    redundancy, but there are still cases where games are lost,
                    and only those that exist on a hard drive or disk somewhere
                    remain. These losses can be accidental, with updated versions
                    not being supported or a developer going under and no longer
                    being able to sell the game, or intentional, as there are
                    cases where for various reasons, developers have intentionally
                    made games unavailable after their release.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    One of the most famous examples of a video game being
                    intentionally removed from all digital marketplaces was a
                    game, or trailer for a game, called *P.T.*This game was
                    actually a trailer for a game that was never released, the
                    name was an abbreviation of Playable Trailer. It was set to be
                    the next installment in the <em>Silent Hill</em> franchise of
                    horror games. The trailer consisted of a player walking
                    through the same house in a loop. As the loop went on, the
                    house got more decrepit, and more noises and scary imagery was
                    put in until eventually a ghost would appear and kill the
                    player. The game was set to have big names attached, at the
                    end of <em>P.T.</em> It is revealed that the character the
                    player controls is based on Norman Reedus, an actor famous for
                    his role on The Walking Dead. Hideo Kojima, a famous game
                    developer, and the director Guillermo Del Toro were also set
                    to work on the game. Unfortunately, Kojima had a falling out
                    with the developer <em>Konami,</em> the game was cancelled,
                    and <em>P.T.</em> was removed from all online game stores.
                    Some copies do survive. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Simelane 2019</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Simelane, Smangaliso. The Legend of P.T.: Kojima’s
                        Masterpiece That Never Happened. Game Rant, August 16,
                        2022.
                        <a href="https://gamerant.com/pt-silent-hills-kojima-canceled-masterpiece-history/" target="_blank">https://gamerant.com/pt-silent-hills-kojima-canceled-masterpiece-history/</a>.</span></cite>) Some players who had installed it made sure to not delete
                    it off their systems, or it would be lost forever. Some copies
                    survive to this day, one of which is in the
                    <em>Strong Museum of Play’s</em> collection. The interest
                    built around this game came in part from the big names working
                    on it, and the excitement of a new installment of a fan
                    favorite franchise like <em>Silent Hill,</em> but also because
                    it was unique. Although game demos were not a new idea,
                    <em>P.T.</em> was made and presented in a different way. Most
                    demos were a level or two pulled from the game, but
                    <em>P.T.</em> was as its name described, a trailer; it was its
                    own self-contained content that just hinted at the story of
                    the now lost <em>Silent Hills</em> –– a fully interactive hook
                    to get people to want more. The trailer made the player a part
                    of the story before the game was even out. The case of
                    <em>P.T.</em> reflects why it is so important to preserve the
                    interactive aspect of video games in museums, and how
                    essential it is to fully engage with them.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    Museums that display video games and have them available for
                    interaction by visitors have different methods of access and
                    what versions are displayed. Some museums, like
                    <em>MOMA</em> not only do things on a case-by-case basis, but
                    also create a smaller build or one manufactured to recreate a
                    massive multiplayer environment, as they did with
                    <em>Dwarf Fortress</em>. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Antonelli and Galloway 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Antonelli, Paola, and Galloway, Paul. “When Video Games
                        Came to the Museum | Magazine | Moma.” MOMA. Accessed
                        October 20, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.moma.org/magazine/articles/798" target="_blank">https://www.moma.org/magazine/articles/798</a>.
                      </span></cite>) Others like the <em>Coputerspielemuseum</em> (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Computerspielemuseum Exhibitions 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Computerspielemuseum Berlin: Special Exhibition. Special
                        Exhibition | manomoneta. Accessed October 22, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/Museum/46-Special-Exhibition.htm" target="_blank">https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/Museum/46-Special-Exhibition.htm</a>.</span></cite>) and the <em>Strong Museum of Play</em> (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Egamerevolution 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Egamerevolution. The Strong National Museum of Play, July
                        5, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.museumofplay.org/exhibit/egamerevolution/" target="_blank">https://www.museumofplay.org/exhibit/egamerevolution/</a>.
                      </span></cite>) have some arcade games, in their original cabinets, but
                    when it comes to home console and PC games, there are other
                    issues encountered. As original hardware fails, having games,
                    especially older or rare ones on display for public use
                    greatly increases the risk that they can be lost forever.
                    Emulation is one method to ensure that the game can be
                    preserved or displayed beyond its original hardware, but it is
                    frowned upon by the gaming industry. There have not been any
                    legal cases regarding creation of emulators of games that are
                    owned by the creator, but when it comes to the distribution of
                    emulated games, especially online, charges of piracy come into
                    play. Museums collecting video games are able to create
                    emulations and recreations of games they own, though they can
                    also work with developers to do this, but they cannot make
                    them available online. This differs somewhat from the trend of
                    digitization across the museum world, but where a painting or
                    other form of more traditional art can have the rights
                    regarding its online publication transferred to a museum when
                    it is donated, unless a game is donated by a developer and
                    consents, the same cannot be done for video games. This makes
                    the <em>Strong Museum’s</em> collection’s availability for
                    research access even more valuable.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    Video games are an extremely varied medium that has expanded
                    from a small niche in entertainment to a mainstay, a
                    multibillion-dollar industry with countless titles released
                    every single year. It is understandable that video games have
                    an established presence in museums, from museums dedicated to
                    video games to larger institutions that acquire them as a part
                    of their collections. The innate interactivity of video games
                    creates challenges and opportunities for their display. By
                    design, video games draw the viewer, the player, in, and make
                    them a part of the art and the story being told. They draw
                    visitors in for an utterly unique experience. They also can be
                    used to make unique art installations based around the games,
                    from oversized games that require cooperation, or something
                    totally new like <em>Coputerspielemuseum’s</em>
                    <em>Pain Station</em>. (<cite class="quire-citation expandable"><span class="quire-citation__button" role="button" tabindex="0" aria-expanded="false">Computerspielemuseum Home 2023</span><span class="quire-citation__content" hidden="">Computerspielemuseum Berlin: Homepage. Homepage |
                        manomoneta. Accessed October 20, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/43-Homepage.htm" target="_blank">https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/43-Homepage.htm</a>.</span></cite>) Like all collection’s materials, video games have their own
                    challenges in regard to preservation. Many older games are
                    long past their expected shelf life and having them available
                    for play puts them at increased risk of damage. Emulation is
                    one method of further preserving and increasing availability
                    of video game collections. As video games continue to be a
                    part of museum collections, they will be used in new and
                    interesting ways of expanding interactivity, and new solutions
                    for preservation will be developed.
                  </p>

                  <div class="quire-page__content__references backmatter">
                    <h2>Bibliography</h2>
                    <ul>
                      <li id="age-of-empires-2023">
                        Age of Empires Franchise - Official Web Site.” Age of
                        Empires / World’s Edge Studio, October 25, 2021.
                        <a href="https://www.ageofempires.com/" target="_blank">https://www.ageofempires.com/</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="age-of-empires-the-strong-national-museum-of-play-2023">
                        Age of Empires. The Strong National Museum of Play,
                        October 31, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.museumofplay.org/exhibit/age-of-empires/" target="_blank">https://www.museumofplay.org/exhibit/age-of-empires/</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="antonelli-and-galloway-2023">
                        Antonelli, Paola, and Galloway, Paul. “When Video Games
                        Came to the Museum | Magazine | Moma.” MOMA. Accessed
                        October 20, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.moma.org/magazine/articles/798" target="_blank">https://www.moma.org/magazine/articles/798</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="arcserve-2023">
                        Arcserve. “Data Storage Lifespans: How Long Will Media
                        Really Last?” Arcserve, April 18, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.arcserve.com/blog/data-storage-lifespans-how-long-will-media-really-last#:~:text=Floppy%20Disk&amp;text=Floppy%20disks%20were%20never%20very,last%20ten%20to%20twenty%20years" target="_blank">https://www.arcserve.com/blog/data-storage-lifespans-how-long-will-media-really-last#:~:text=Floppy
                          Disk&amp;text=Floppy disks were never very,last ten to
                          twenty years</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="computerspielemuseum-home-2023">
                        Computerspielemuseum Berlin: Homepage. Homepage |
                        manomoneta. Accessed October 20, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/43-Homepage.htm" target="_blank">https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/43-Homepage.htm</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="computerspielemuseum-exhibitions-2023">
                        Computerspielemuseum Berlin: Special Exhibition. Special
                        Exhibition | manomoneta. Accessed October 22, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/Museum/46-Special-Exhibition.htm" target="_blank">https://www.computerspielemuseum.de/en/Museum/46-Special-Exhibition.htm</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="acmi-2023">
                        Curating Our Centrepiece Exhibition. ACMI. Accessed
                        October 22, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.acmi.net.au/stories-and-ideas/curating-our-centrepiece-exhibition-story-moving-image/" target="_blank">https://www.acmi.net.au/stories-and-ideas/curating-our-centrepiece-exhibition-story-moving-image/</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="egamerevolution-2023">
                        Egamerevolution. The Strong National Museum of Play, July
                        5, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.museumofplay.org/exhibit/egamerevolution/" target="_blank">https://www.museumofplay.org/exhibit/egamerevolution/</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="world-economic-forum-2023">
                        Gaming Is Booming and Is Expected to Keep Growing. This
                        Chart Tells You All You Need to Know. World Economic
                        Forum. Accessed October 4, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/07/gaming-pandemic-lockdowns-pwc-growth/" target="_blank">https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/07/gaming-pandemic-lockdowns-pwc-growth/</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="icheg-2023">
                        International Center for the History of Electronic Games.
                        The Strong National Museum of Play, July 24, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.museumofplay.org/collections/icheg/" target="_blank">https://www.museumofplay.org/collections/icheg/</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="never-alone-2023">
                        Never alone: Video games and other interactive design |
                        moma. Accessed November 25, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.moma.org/calendar/exhibitions/5453" target="_blank">https://www.moma.org/calendar/exhibitions/5453</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="the-strong-national-museum-of-play-2023">
                        Research Access. The Strong National Museum of Play, July
                        10, 2023.
                        <a href="https://www.museumofplay.org/collections/research-access/" target="_blank">https://www.museumofplay.org/collections/research-access/</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="simelane-2019">
                        Simelane, Smangaliso. The Legend of P.T.: Kojima’s
                        Masterpiece That Never Happened. Game Rant, August 16,
                        2022.
                        <a href="https://gamerant.com/pt-silent-hills-kojima-canceled-masterpiece-history/" target="_blank">https://gamerant.com/pt-silent-hills-kojima-canceled-masterpiece-history/</a>.
                      </li>

                      <li id="wells-2020">
                        Wells, Robert Earl. What Is a Video Game Emulator? A Way
                        to Play Retro Games on Your PC. Lifewire, March 11, 2020.
                        <a href="https://www.lifewire.com/video-game-emulators-need-to-know-4687006" target="_blank">https://www.lifewire.com/video-game-emulators-need-to-know-4687006</a>.
                      </li>
                    </ul>
                  </div>
                </div>

              </div>
            </section>
          </body>
</html>
