<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_assets/epub.css" />
    <title>Teaching Museum Digital Practice in 2023</title>

  </head>
  <body xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" id="page-intro">
            <section class="quire-page__header hero">
              <div class="hero-body">
                <h1 class="quire-page__header__title" id="page-header-/intro">
                  Teaching Museum Digital Practice in 2023
                </h1>
              </div>
            </section>

            <section class="section quire-page__content">
              <div class="container">
                <div class="content no-image-above">
                  <p>
                    The
                    <a href="https://corcoran.gwu.edu/museum-studies" target="_blank"><em>Master of Arts in Museum Studies</em></a>
                    program at George Washington University responds to the
                    evolving museum profession by combining hands-on training with
                    future-focused theoretical engagement. Students who enrol in
                    the program gain foundational knowledge about the state of
                    museum work today, practical skills and the ability to
                    critically engage with developments in the field.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    In <em>Museums and Technology</em>, we take on an ambitious
                    project to realize these goals. Across the 14-week semester,
                    the class creates a publication about the state of digital
                    practice in museums in 2023. Each student is responsible for
                    creating a publishable piece that explores a specific research
                    area related to the overall topic of museums and technology.
                    Submissions can synthesize current readings and practice
                    around a broad area, or dive deeper into a single technology
                    or case study related to the theme of digital practice and its
                    impact on the museum.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    This is the fourth iteration of this publication project. The
                    <a href="https://ad-hoc-museum-collective.github.io/GWU-museum-digital-practice-2019/" target="_blank">first</a>, produced in 2019, was designed by Dr Suse Anderson, and
                    informed by her experience co-editing several
                    digitally-informed publishing projects, including
                    <a href="https://medium.com/code-words-technology-and-theory-in-the-museum" target="_blank"><em>CODE|WORDS Technology and Theory in the Museum</em></a>, which brought together leading museum thinkers and
                    practitioners to explore the impact of digital technology on
                    the nature of museums, and
                    <a href="https://ad-hoc-museum-collective.github.io/humanizing-the-digital/" target="_blank"><em>Humanizing the Digital: Unproceedings from the 2018 MCN
                        Confererence</em></a>, which responded to the
                    <a href="http://mcn.edu" target="_blank"><em>MCN annual conference</em></a>. Each of these museum tech projects marked a specific moment
                    in time within the sector. Likewise, it is intended that each
                    annual publication in the
                    <em>The State of Museum Digital Practice</em> series will
                    stand as a marker of each cohort of students and their
                    concerns and interests in a specific timeframe.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    The first two versions of this publication (produced in
                    <a href="https://ad-hoc-museum-collective.github.io/GWU-museum-digital-practice-2019/" target="_blank">2019</a>
                    and
                    <a href="https://ad-hoc-museum-collective.github.io/Museum-Digital-Practice-2021/" target="_blank">2021</a>) buttressed the global coronavirus pandemic, with its huge
                    disruptions to museum practice, education and daily life. The
                    <a href="https://gwu-museum-studies.github.io/Museum-Digital-Practice-2022/" target="_blank">2022 publication</a>
                    came from a world still in the earliest grapplings with the
                    implications of the pandemic, but already showing signs of
                    concern with different kinds of issues, and new possible
                    futures for museums in their relationships with technology.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    In 2023, we find students starting to consider new kinds of
                    emerging technologies… Artificial Intelligence, or AI, has
                    started to appear as a player in the imaginations of several
                    students as they think about the present and future of digital
                    technologies in museums, including considering the role of AI
                    in provenance research or meditating on the ethical
                    considerations of AI-enabled historic storytelling. Others
                    imagine a possible future where volumetric holograms play a
                    role in historic landscape reconstruction or where 3D digital
                    exhibitions fill a kind of nostalgic craving in those looking
                    for a lost past. As a group, this cohort is ambitious,
                    creative and speculative, asking many of the same kinds of
                    questions of technology as prior generations, but set against
                    within a changing techscape.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    Each student is responsible for defining and researching their
                    topic and writing their paper. Suse Anderson, Associate
                    Professor in Museum Studies is responsible for compiling the
                    final book. Because the project is produced quickly, the
                    editorial hand is only lightly felt, so there may be
                    inconsistencies in style, formatting and approach.
                  </p>
                  <p>
                    We hope you enjoy this publication, produced by the fall class
                    of 2023.
                  </p>
                </div>

              </div>
            </section>
          </body>
</html>
