---
title: Oral History in Museum Exhibitions
subtitle: A Partnership for Good
layout: essay
order: 42
contributor:
  - id: ebrown

---

## In the Beginning
Remembering history has been important to humans since the beginning. Pictures were drawn, stories passed down through generations, information written down and stored; all have helped to keep the past accessible in the present, to remember who we are and where we came from. Oral history has been collected for thousands of years. One early account is found in the histories of the Zhou dynasty in China where oral histories had been written down in the courts. ({% cite 'Ritchie 2003' '19' %}) Interestingly, in the late 1800s, oral histories were “seen as unscientific and biased” which was the opposite of the desires of the time for researchers of all disciplines to be “as scientific and objective as possible” in their work. ({% cite 'Webster 2016' '256' %}) However, groups that had not been keeping their history through paper archives became a topic of interest for oral history interviewing and recording, despite this opposition. In the 1890s, Native Americans, who had kept most, though not all, of their history through oral tradition were recorded by the U.S. Bureau of Ethnography. ({% cite 'Ritchie 2003' '21' %}) Oral history only grew after this point in history. 

During the Great Depression in the United States, the WPA, Works Progress Administration, paid out of work writers to interview and collect information on the lives of ordinary citizens. ({% cite 'Ritchie 2003' '22' %}) The Columbia Oral History Research office was established in 1948. Nineteen years later in 1967, the Oral History Association was created. ({% cite 'Webster 2016' '256' %}) The creation of these groups pushed the oral history movement forward, encouraging more interest in oral history interviews. Oral history has been extensively collected from groups since. Post World War II, thousands of oral history interviews were conducted of those who fought in the war and those who survived the horrors of the Holocaust. ({% cite 'United States Holocaust Memorial Museum 2023' %}) After the terrorist attacks on 9/11, thousands of people gave firsthand accounts of what they saw and experienced that day. ({% cite '9/11 Museum & Memorial 2023' %}) Oral history has become incredibly important and more widely used in the history field, because firsthand accounts of events give new insight that a static document cannot provide. 

Museums also began to take notice of the important role oral history can play in an exhibit. They bring about a unique perspective to the objects and exhibits being displayed. Some museums create incredible oral history inclusions, such as the Anacostia Community Museum’s most recent exhibition, *To Live and Breathe: Women and Environmental Justice in Washington, D.C.* Others still have a way to go. This essay will argue that the utilization of oral history in museum exhibitions provides an important human connection to the material being exhibited. It will also contend that the practice of oral history is a meaningful way to remember shared histories and personal stories. It should be collected often, on a wide array of topics to remember the realities of human experiences.

Understanding what oral history is and how it is gathered is important to the idea of using oral history in a museum exhibit. It is important to note that oral tradition and oral history are two different things, though often conflated with one another. Oral tradition is a practice of passing down history through word of mouth. Anyone can be a participant in this. If a grandmother tells the story of how she met her husband to her children and then they tell their children, and then that story continues to get told to each new generation, the story is kept alive through oral tradition within that family. Oral history is different, and though it is often not stated, this refers to interviews done with another person. The interview aspect is an important part of what oral history is today. A person recounts their life and experiences to someone who is going to record and collect this information for a multitude of uses. ({% cite 'Ritchie 2003' '19' %}) Knowing how this information is collected and gathered will lead to a better understanding of what benefit it would bring to a museum exhibit.

## Collecting Oral History
Though there are no strict requirements on how to collect oral history, the Oral History Association, OHA, gives guidelines on best practices. There is an outline of how to prepare to for interviews, what to do while interviewing, and how to collect and preserve the oral histories one conducts. ({% cite 'Oral History Association 2018' %})

What makes a good oral history interview? It starts with the preparation. Preparing for the interview with solid questions helps to keep the interviews consistent, making sure the interviewees all have an opportunity to answer each important question. The OHA recommends interviewing the subject in a quiet space and gathering a diverse and relevant group of people to interview. They encourage open-ended discussions and questions that guide the interviewee to provide more context and information, rather than answer just the question asked. The OHA also recommends getting a legal release signed at the time of the interview, preferably at the end. ({% cite 'Oral History Association 2018' %}) Following these guidelines allows for a more uniformed collection of oral history.

My own experiences in collecting oral history do not match up exactly – and I think that is okay. Oral history guidelines help create a uniformed collection. However, that does not mean oral history cannot still be accomplished. As an undergrad student, I did a research project for a class where I found there was a huge gap in information. I had decided to do research on housewives in US history from the 1950s into the present day. I wanted to compare the differences in how their role had changed in the home over time and how society’s perception of them had changed over time. Unfortunately, the kind of information I needed regarding more modern-day examples didn’t really exist, so I set out to interview some women in my community. I created a specified set of questions to ask them all that I felt would give me an accurate understanding. I conducted the interviews wherever the women would meet up with me, so unfortunately, some of them are in a more crowded coffee shop, not exactly the quiet space the OHA recommends. 

This early stage of creating oral history was initially intended purely for my personal use in a college assignment. I had no formal training, it was right after a pandemic, and I was just hoping to get information I could use in my project. I learned along the way how to better ask the questions to get those I interviewed to tell a story rather than just answer the question and be done. It was not until the semester ended and I turned in my project when I realized that deleting the twenty or so interviews I had spent so much time doing did not feel right. With some guidance by a professor, I decided to reach out to the library on campus to see if they would be interested in housing them as a collection. Researchers could use the information I had gathered in their projects and papers. I reached out to the women I had spoken to in order to get their consent to donate their specific interview to the library and allow others to access them.

My experience in collecting oral history wasn’t perfect. There is minimal uniformity. I learned a lot along the way rather than getting information up front. My intended use was not for anyone but myself, so I didn’t follow the OHA guidelines to the letter. Even still, I believe these interviews could be of use to someone in the future, or educational, or interesting and felt that they would be better served to the public than just sitting on my computer forever. That is one of the wonderful things about oral history interviews, even an interview done for class can have a life larger than the assignment it was originally intended for.

## What Makes Oral History so Special?
What is so fascinating about oral history is that anyone who listens is able to hear about an experience from the mouth of someone who lived it. Listeners can know exactly the tone of voice that was used to tell the story, they can hear the inflection on certain words and how they might change the meaning. If the interview is video recorded, a viewer can witness the emotion in the eyes of the speaker. They can see a person has aged if they are telling stories from a time before. Almost in a way, verifying that this person truly lived in the past. ({% cite 'de Jong 2018' '115' %}) Oral history can create a unique human connection to history.

Museums as institutions set out to tell stories, to bring history into the present and inform those that step inside. Using oral history to tell the stories, direct from the mouths of those who experienced them, can be an incredible way to utilize a collection of history. Collecting oral history allows stories that might never be told to get added to the history books. People who could not read or write, who did not have access to higher education were able to bring their stories to the world through oral history interviews. Oral history interviewing has been a tool that allows marginalized populations of all kinds, all over the world, to tell their stories when they might not have been recorded otherwise. ({% cite 'Ritchie 2003' '13,23' %}) Not only do marginalized populations get a voice, but those who are silenced by an ‘official’ narrative can refute and tell their truths, like those living in the Soviet Union after its collapse. Oral historians from Russia and Eastern Europe became hugely interested in interviewing regular people. They reviewed and compared the ‘official’ narratives given by the totalitarian regime and those given by the people who lived in the former Soviet Union. When comparing the two, it was easy to find holes and lies in the ‘official’ narrative when so many regular people were giving a story that differed from the government but matched other citizens. ({% cite 'Ritchie 2003' '23-24' %})

## Exhibiting Oral Histories
How does a curator or an exhibit designer put oral history into the exhibit and make it a good addition? Sarah Zenaida Gould, a curator from Texas, discusses some of her challenges in adding oral history into her exhibitions. Managing the sound from videos is one of the big ones. Trying not to overwhelm visitors with too much sound stimulation is something curators need to be cognizant of when putting together an exhibit. For Gould, a solution was to use a ‘sound wand’ that visitors could pick up to listen to the oral history. ({% cite 'Gould 2016' %}) Unfortunately, based on Gould’s estimation over half the visitors did not stop to listen and she does not quite know the reason. Too long? Missed it completely? Any number of reasons could have kept visitors from engaging with the oral interviews. ({% cite 'Gould 2016' %}) 

There is no single, correct way to display and elevate oral history in a museum exhibit. There is no formulaic way to display them, to deal with the sound, to make them eye-catching enough to grab the attention of a visitor, but not so long they walk away before it is over. However, even without a formula to display oral history, there are good processes utilized by exhibit designers when it comes to sound in museums. Understanding sound, even at a basic level, can help designers and curators create a more cohesive space that does not overwhelm the visitor. Types of sound can be placed into two basic categories: diegetic and non-diegetic. Diegetic sound is normally things like “audiovisual presentations, interactive stations, and other content-driven musical/soundscape installations,” or, things put in the foreground of an exhibit. While non-diegetic sound is most often things that appear naturally in the background; the scuffing of shoes, kids laughing, background music can also be considered non-diegetic. ({% cite 'Everett 2019' '314' %}) For a designer, understanding these categories of sound can come in hand when creating an oral history exhibition. Taking into account both the intentional and background sound that will exist can help create a display of oral history that does not completely overwhelm the visitor’s senses. Nikos Bubaris makes a great point when discussing the stereotypes that come with museums and their influence on exhibitions. For so long, the idea that museums are places of silent reflection has been a pervasive idea for those visiting and working in museums. Bubaris makes note that, believing a public space should be silent makes sound a big issue from the outset of designing the exhibit. ({% cite 'Bubaris 2014' '391' %}) How is there supposed to be a good balance between the diegetic and non-diegetic sounds in the museum if it is believed by both workers and visitors that any background noise should not exist? As museums become more sound-inclusive spaces, a push toward the idea that sound is present and welcome in museums, oral history might find an easier path into museums that might previously have shied away from the sound in favor of silence. 

Gould discusses an exhibit that came to be without the use of video and audio, but rather the oral history interviews were transcribed and written on panels throughout the space. A great question Gould asks, “Could it be that video is easier to ignore than the written word?” ({% cite 'Gould 2016' %}) In this modern age, sounds are around us constantly. Music in the background at stores and restaurants, or video on while scrolling on phones. It can be easy to miss a video or audio portion of an exhibit when so often a person is already surrounded my pre-recorded noises. This issue that arises when displaying oral history should not dissuade curators from utilizing oral history within their exhibits. It should encourage them to think outside what has already been tried, what has already not worked out. The beauty of oral history comes from its unique abilities to share personal stories, firsthand accounts from those who lived the experience an exhibit is trying to display. Excluding oral history from exhibitions purely because it is challenging is not good practice, curators display challenging history and ideas constantly, this should not be the exception.

## Oral History in Use Today: The Anacostia Community Museum
The Anacostia Community Museum in Washington, D.C. is an example of utilizing oral history inside an exhibition in a meaningful way. The museum’s curator, Rachel Seidman, created an exhibit about women and environmental justice in Washington, D.C. and does a beautiful job of getting real stories from community members and including them in the exhibit. ({% cite 'Anacostia 2023' %}) There are quotes on the walls, pictures and videos that correlate. At the Anacostia Community Museum, the objects have obvious stories, they have obvious significance. There is a pair of boots from a woman who works in aquaculture, a male dominated industry. Her boots, along with a quote from an oral history interview next to the boots, gives a tangible meaning to those visiting. Oral history is a connection to a story straight from the source. Rather than just get information on how women are impacted by these environmental injustices, we as visitors, see exactly how it impacts real people. It is no longer an idea, but a reality that we see in the lives of those showcased in the exhibit. 

While visiting the museum, Seidman discussed with my group the importance of connection when working with oral history in communities. The women’s stories she told in the exhibit are a vitally important part in telling the story of environmental injustice in DC, the whole concept of the exhibit. The same can be said for oral history inside other exhibits. The information that can be learned from an oral history interview can create an exhibit all on its own. Even still, utilizing oral history in combination with an existing idea can bring about a new level on connection. Real people, real stories, can put visitors that much closer to understanding and caring about the exhibit they visited. The Anacostia Community Museum does an amazing job when it comes to including oral history. Knowing that it is possible is an encouragement to all curators that oral history can work in exhibit space and be intriguing in exhibit space. 

## Transcending the Current Use
Steffi de Jong writes about a man, Kurt Tucholsky, who visited the First World War Museum and felt that it was missing the realities of the war. There were just recreations, pictures and posters, improvised shoes made out of newspapers inside the museum; nothing that spoke to the horrors of war, nothing that brought any emotion into the equation. ({% cite 'de Jong 2018' '110' %}) This absence of emotion left him feeling the display was inadequate in telling the real story. An object is just another object without a story behind it. Today, museums utilize the story behind objects in many exhibitions. They give reference to an example of when an old object might have been used. Or they recreate the style of clothing that may have been worn during a specific time period. Utilizing oral histories can give viewers a true experience in which an object was used. A camera that ‘may have been used during this war’ is interesting to many on its own because it is old and from a different time. But seeing that a camera was used by a soldier during a war and captured images of the conflict might bring about a more solid, human connection to the object. As stated previously, objects do not really mean much without a human connection to them. Oral history can provide an incredible story to an object. But that is not all oral history can do. Oral history in itself is a great resource for museums. 

The use of oral history in museums has taken a course that leads visitors to a better understanding of real human experience when they step inside the exhibit. It is being utilized in museums in new and interesting ways. It is getting collected by many different oral historians. It is getting collected from varied groups on various topics. With so much oral history being collected and museums already utilizing it in the exhibitions, museums are well on their way to making oral history exhibitions a staple of museums. As the field progresses to be more sound inclusive, oral history audio and video recordings shift from being too loud or distracting to an integral part of the sound landscape. The increase in collecting oral history allows for both historical and more contemporary first-hand accounts of experiences being presented in museums. With incredible examples like the Anacostia Community Museum to lead the way and visitors like me, that see a human connection to the material through oral history as something intriguing and engaging, oral history exhibits are sure to be popping up more in the near future. 